---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "The Last Tourist: Deconstructing the Colonial Structure of Tourism"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2025-05-15
published: true
labels:
  - Tourism
  - Colonialism
---

  The documentary, The Last Tourist, exposes the consequences of modern tourism upon popular tourist destinations around the world. Through closely highlighting different locations where tourism has disproportionately affected, the film illustrates to the viewer how tourism degrades these host communities’ populations, wildlife, and environments. The Last Tourist reveals that the overall structure of the tourism industry is heavily colonial by nature, where wealthy foreign companies and people infringe on indigenous territories, and exploit them and their natives of land and culture for entertainment and profit. Although the weight of this structure is heavy, the film also demonstrates that efforts are being made to create a more sustainable form of tourism, a form of tourism which accurately promotes a place’s culture and benefits its people, too.
  
  The film spends the first part informing the viewer on the negative impacts that have come with the tourism industry on host communities. With the technological advancement of air transportation and the rapid increase in its availability, international travel has never been more accessible than it is today. Due to this increased ease of travel, there have been as much as 1.3 billion international trips taken in a single year (The Last Tourist, 10:29–10:38). While this convenience in travel has its benefits, it also has caused an influx of foreigners in places that were previously out of reach before. Costas Christ–National Geographic Traveler–was the first visitor to what was a remote location in Ko Pha Ngan, Thailand in 1979. When Costas first went to Ko Pha Ngan, only one family lived there. However, the tourism industry also found out about this remote, tropical location. Soon enough Ko Pha Ngan turned into a destination where tourists could “let loose” and party to their heart’s content. The consequences of this were uncontrolled urbanization and environmental damage, as what once was a beautiful place of tropical nature, had been morphed into dirty party grounds with trash everywhere on the sands of the beaches. Ko Pha Ngan serves as a prime example of the harm tourism can cause to a place’s environment. The Last Tourist reveals how tourism has an adverse effect on the wildlife in host communities; the film shows this through focusing mainly on the treatment of elephants that are put on display for tourists in Thailand. From the perspective of the tourist, the Asian elephant is a performer that is supposed to entertain them; an elephant is something they can take a picture with and post for their friends on social media. However, the film uncovers the dark truth underlying these seemingly harmless elephant performances. These elephants are the subjects of unspeakable abuse; they are separated from their mothers when they are calfs, and then conditioned to bend to the trainer’s will and follow what he says, or be punished by being struck with a hook. This abuse is so severe, an elephant might need to have its trunk tied up so it doesn’t bite it to kill itself (The Last Tourist, [50:17–50:37]). The main reason elephant abuse persists in Thailand is because the tourists continue to pay to see them in this state, weak and emotionally damaged.\
  
  In contrast from the first part, the second part of the film shows how different tour guides are practicing more viable modes of tourism in order to bring out the positives of it, while reducing the damages it can cause. One guide that the film highlights is Sangduen Lek Chailert, the founder of Save Elephant Foundation. Sangduen operates a sanctuary where she cares for elephants that she rescued from the torture that comes with being forced to perform for tourists. The sanctuary serves as a place where these elephants can “live free from fear and with dignity” (“Home - Save Elephant Foundation”). In this sanctuary, she doesn’t train them with torture, she trains them with love (The Last Tourist, 1:07:49–1:08:03). The film might have chosen to cover Sangduen’s elephant sanctuary because it serves as an example of successful tourism without having to harm wildlife to reach that success. The film also focuses on Yachan Delfin Pauchi Yalishara, founder of the Pimpilala Lodge in Ecuador. Yachan guides tourists through the Amazon rainforest and explains the spiritual significance of plants and water; his tourism is a powerful form of tourism that educates visitors on his people’s culture and history. Yachan’s tours through the Amazon are a glimpse of what a majority of tourism should actually look like: a journey that introduces new perspectives on life from different cultures. The film’s second part serves to educate the viewer on what sustainable and culturally-conscious tourism looks like, and that the first step that it takes is understanding the place that one is traveling to.\

  When looking closer into the overall structure of the modern tourism industry, it is one that is heavily based on colonialism, where the comfort of Western visitors are prioritized over the cultural well-being of the actual natives of these tourist destinations. This hierarchical structure is shown in the film through the orphanage volunteer system in host communities. Volunteers (who are most of the time white, and from a wealthier country) are often treated to better living conditions than the orphans they are looking after (The Last Tourist, [57:19–58:02]); they also are compensated with money that could have gone to supporting the orphans. This entire system is steeped in neocolonialism, as the foreign entity exploits the indigenous population for financial gain with no genuine attachment to the people’s culture and plight. This can be related to the hotel industry in the Pacific, where the “development” culture prioritizes profit over people and culture; this causes Pacific Islanders to be exploited by companies out there to make a quick buck (Thaman, 110). Expanding upon this topic, Haunani-Kay Trask also delves into how Hawaii’s tourism industry is made up of multinational conglomerates that use native Hawaiian land for profit. She states that the profits earned are “repatriated back to the home country” (Trask, 25). This again details how foreign powers are free to use indigenous land for financial gain, but they aren’t obligated to put that money back into the same land in which they exploit. Similar to the tourism industry in Hawaii, and hotel industry in the Pacific as a whole, neocolonialism permeates through tourism around the world.\

  The Last Tourist is a peek into the tourism industry, and it shows that it usually damages a location’s environment, its wildlife, and most importantly, its people. It also illustrates how the industry is built on colonialism, and on the exploitation of indigenous people, land, and resources. The film also shows that valiant efforts are being made to turn tourism into an industry that can benefit host communities’ land and culture, and that with better understanding of the places being visited, we can create a more sustainable form of tourism in which people are at the forefront.\

## Works Cited
- Helu-Thaman, Konai. "Beyond hula, hotels, and handicrafts: A Pacific islander's
perspective of tourism development." The Contemporary Pacific (1993): 104-111.
- “Home - Save Elephant Foundation.” Save Elephant Foundation, 2016, www.saveelephant.org/.
Accessed 6 May 2025.
- The Last Tourist. Directed by Tyler Sadler, Skin and Bones Film Company, Born Explorer Films,
2021.\
- Trask, Haunani-Kay. "Lovely Hula Hands." Mapping the Social Landscape: Readings in
Sociology 102 (2001): 22-34.\
